---
title: "Elastic Additive Angular Margin Loss Integrated with Mixup for Anomalous Sound Detection"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2025-10-22-number-18
excerpt: ' '
date: 2025-10-22
venue: ' '
paperurl: 'https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/11249183'
citation: 'Y. Zhao, Y. Yang, X. Zhang, and S. Makino, “Elastic additive angular margin loss integrated with mixup for anomalous sound detection,” in Proc. APSIPA ASC, 2025, pp. 477-482.'
---

Unsupervised anomalous sound detection (ASD) aims to detect anomalous sounds by modeling only normal sounds. Conventional methods use classification-based selfsupervised neural network models to identify normal and abnormal sounds. Building on this idea, Additive Angular Margin Loss (ArcFace) is utilized to enhance intra-class compactness and inter-class discrepancy of normal classes. Furthermore, previous methods introduce mixup to ensure intra-class compactness and alleviate the overlap of normal and anomalous data distributions. However, the additive angular margin applies only to a single target logit but not to learning from interpolated labels and samples generated by mixup. Additionally, its fixed margin is unsuitable for data with inconsistent intra-class and inter-class variations. To solve these issues, we propose a training method applying an elastic angular margin loss to mixup data augmentation, namely Elastic-Margin-Mixup (EMM). The proposed EMM weights the margin penalty by the interpolation factor, enabling the ArcFace loss to adapt appropriately to interpolated samples. Moreover, it introduces proportional randomization across differently weighted margins to further help the model handle inconsistent variations both between and within classes. On the DCASE 2020 Challenge Task 2 dataset, experimental results demonstrate that our proposed EMM achieved an AUC of 95.03% and a pAUC of 89.95%, surpassing previous approaches integrating ArcFace and mixup for anomalous sound detection.