---
title: "Switching Constant Separating Vector for Moving Source Extraction with Geometric Constraints"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2025-10-22-number-17
excerpt: ' '
date: 2025-10-22
venue: ' '
paperurl: 'https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/11249272'
citation: 'C. Chen, Y. Yang, Y. Zhao, S. Makino, and J. Chen, “Switching constant separating vector for moving source extraction with geometric constraints,” in Proc. APSIPA ASC, 2025, pp. 13-18.'
---

Blind source extraction (BSE) becomes particularly challenging when the source of interest (SOI) is moving. Constant separating vector-based independent vector extraction with auxiliary function optimization (CSV-AuxIVE) uses a blockvarying mixing model and estimates a time-invariant separating vector to extract the moving SOI. However, its performance deteriorates when the number of microphones is limited. To overcome this limitation, a switching mechanism was introduced in SwCSV-IVE, allowing different separating vectors across time blocks and frequency bins. Despite this improvement, SwCSVIVE still suffers from instability due to inter-state permutation ambiguity. In this paper, we propose GC-SwCSV-IVE, a geometrically constrained switching CSV-based IVE method that incorporates geometric constraints (GC). By exploiting direction-of-arrival (DOA) information of the SOI, GC-SwCSV-IVE guides the optimization of switching separating vectors for improved robustness. Additionally, we introduce a state regularization technique to further enhance numerical stability during optimization. Experimental results show that the proposed method significantly improves both extraction performance and accuracy across various microphone configurations.